the unexpurgated pike report foreword by
philip AG report of the House Select
Committee on Intelligence 1976
introduction by Philip Agee Pike will
pay for this you wait and see we will
destroy him for this strong words quoted
on the floor of the US House of
Representatives by Congressman Otis Pike
himself he was quoting from an alleged
threat made by Mitchell Raghavan
the CIA's Special Counsel for legal
affairs to Cyril field staff director of
the House Select Committee on
Intelligence headed by Pike according to
Pike the CIA's counsel went on I'm
serious
there will be political retaliation any
political ambitions in New York that
Pike had are through we will destroy him
for this Pike's revelation of the
threats which were immediately denied by
the CIA's counsel came on March 9th 1976
a month after his committee for
investigating the CIA had submitted its
recommendations and gone out of
existence even if the threats were never
made or if they were in fact expressed
in a milder more suggestive fashion they
were consistent with the controversy
within the committee and it's stormy
relations with the executive branch that
had prevailed from the time the
committee was established 13 months
earlier in his denunciation of the
threats Pike was reacting to a series of
events that culminated only days earlier
when New York's weekly Village Voice and
special supplements On February 16th and
23rd 1976 published most of the secret
report based on the work of Pike's
investigating committee publication of
the report highlights of which had
already leaked into the press from
January 20th onwards provoked an
emotional and angry outburst from
Secretary of State Henry Kissinger who
was criticized severely in the report
for his passion for secrecy and for
making false statements to the Congress
at a news conference Kissinger denounced
the committee's quote
totally irresponsible behavior the
misuse of highly classified information
in a ten dishes and misleading manner
that must do damage to the foreign
policy of the United States the use of
classified information in a manner that
is so distorted that the total impact is
to produce a malicious lie a new version
of McCarthyism end quote meanwhile a
spokesman for the White House said
President Ford believed the report
published in The Village Voice was
leaked by someone in the Congress while
congressman Pike suggested that it was
leaked by the executive branch to help
the CIA by making the committee look bad
only days later in early March the CIA
claimed that the committee had failed to
return and couldn't find some 230
documents at least some of which were
classified secret that the agency had
given the committee in the course of its
investigation Pike had problems with his
own house of representatives as well as
significant leaks of the report began to
appear in the New York Times and other
publications during the last two weeks
of January 1976 then CIA director
William Colby pleaded with the house not
to publish the report because to do so
would damage the country's intelligence
activities and endanger agency
operations then on January 29th the full
House voted to suppress publication
until the White House had been able to
censor it an action tantamount to a
rebuke by the house to its own
investigating committee after the vote
against him
Pike described his committees work as an
exercise in futility and lamented that
the house quote probably will not ever
have a strong Oversight Committee end
quote
nevertheless despite the houses
submission to the executive and despite
renewed public sympathy towards the CIA
with the executives adroit manipulation
of the killing of Richard Welch the CIA
station chief in Athens in December and
despite the backlash against the
continued leaks not just from the House
report it should be noted despite all
these facts
militating against disclosure of the
report it got out in late January
someone still unidentified gave a copy
of the report to Daniel Schorr the CBS
television news reporter based in
Washington who began using parts of the
report in his broadcasting when it's
full publication was expected shortly
before the House voted to allow
executive censorship after the House
vote sure tried first to get the report
published in book form but in the anti
release of secrets atmosphere prevailing
in February his only sure outlet was The
Village Voice after the voice published
sure explained quote I found myself
unexpectedly because of a surprise
action by the house in possession of
possibly the only available copy of a
report bearing no classification on its
face its principal sensations already
divulged my problem was that doing
nothing would mean that I would be
suppressing a report that might be
interesting as a matter of public record
end quote
Shores admission brought calls in the
house for revocation of his
congressional press credentials while at
the same time the Department of Justice
pondered whether he should be prosecuted
under the Espionage loss thus reviving
First Amendment issues left unresolved
when the Pentagon Papers trial of Daniel
Ellsberg and Anthony Russo was aborted
during the Watergate scandals the House
voted to have its ethics committee House
Committee on standards of official
conduct investigate the leak later
appropriating $150,000 for the effort
CBS for its part suspended Shore from
all reporting duties pending the outcome
of the congressional investigation sure
was clearly and surprisingly on the
defensive what had happened in the
United States during the two months
since Welch's death it seemed that the
American public had had enough almost
two years had passed
beginning with publication in May 1974
after a long court battle of the CIA and
the cult of intelligence during which
one
scandal and abuse after another were
charged to the CIA FBI and other
security agencies after an initial
overlap with the Watergate episode and
the end of the Nixon presidency the
scandals had grown dramatically with
revelations of the CIA's subversion of
the I end a government in chilly
September 1974 and of the CIA's massive
illegal domestic operations December
1974 my own book on the CIA appeared
first in January 1975 the same month
President Ford appointed the Rockefeller
Commission to investigate the CIA's
domestic activities and the same month
the Senate established its investigating
committee under Senator Frank church by
February 1976 when the pike report was
published a large sector of the American
public seemed not to want to hear it
some no doubt having no more stomach for
scandal disillusion and moral conflict
others surely because they were
beginning to realize just how damaging
the revelations had become in the midst
of the controversy on February 17th
President Ford seized more initiative by
announcing his reform plan for the CIA
and other security services with media
coverage that only an American president
can command Ford described his executive
order to strengthen the intelligence
agencies and he recommended to Congress
a new law providing fines and prison
terms for persons who disclose
classified information in his appeal for
new legislation Ford said quote it is
essential that the irresponsible and
dangerous potion's intelligence secrets
be stopped openness is a hallmark of our
democratic society but the American
people have never believed that it was
necessary to reveal secret war plans of
the Department of Defense and I do not
think they wish to have true
intelligence secrets revealed either end
quote nevertheless the world already had
the pike report a truly extraordinary
and revealing document thanks to the
persist
and courage of Otis Pike and the members
of his committee of Daniel Schorr and of
the Village Voice when reading the
report one should keep in mind not only
the conflicting circumstances
surrounding its original publication but
also the quiet real possibilities that
existed during the committee's early
months first that the committee would
make no real investigation or second
that the committee would be abolished
before even beginning its work
established by a House Resolution in
February 1975 the Select Committee on
Intelligence was first placed under the
chairmanship of Representative Lucien
ned's II of Michigan who is also the
chairman of the House Armed Services
Intelligence subcommittee since this
subcommittee had for many years
exercised the house's watchdog
responsibilities over the CIA Ned's II
as chairman of the Select Committee
would in a very real sense be
investigating his own performance
fortunately he was subject to some
strong and effective pushing from to
select committee members whose
opposition to the CIA's clandestine
interventions abroad was well known
Michael Harrington of Massachusetts and
Ronald dellums
of California even so by June 1975 the
committee had hardly turned to stone
when the New York Times dropped a
blockbuster on them on June 5th The
Times revealed that two years earlier
Ned Z had been briefed by the new CIA
director William Colby on the results of
a recent CIA in-house investigation of
assassinations illegal operations and
other abuses Ned Z had taken no action
and had not even informed the other
members of his House Armed Services
Intelligence Subcommittee Harrington
dellums and liberals on the Select
Committee demanded Ned Z's resignation
which he gave but which was refused by
the full house and a vote on June 16th
thereafter Ned Z refused to function as
chairman of the Select Committee and a
move began to abolish it complicate
the impasse was Ned Z's refusal to make
classified information available to
Harrington from Ned Z's armed services
intelligence subcommittee because
Harrington had been partly responsible
for the leaking in September 1974 of
details of the CIA's subversion of the I
end a government Harrington's
information had come from the
subcommittee documents of Ned Z who was
determined not to give Harrington any
more ammunition finally on July 17th the
house abolished the Select Committee
under Ned Z and established a new select
committee under the chairmanship of Otis
Pike both Ned Z and Harrington were left
off the new committee which said about
the investigation that eventually
produced the pike report and one of
those apparent contradictions not
uncommon in American politics Pike 54
son of a Republican Long Island banker
and representative of a conservative
Long Island District a Democratic Party
member since he was 21 and foe of
expensive Pentagon weapons projects was
responsible for some of the most
important and enlightening revelations
on CIA operations to date part one of
the Select Committee's report published
in the February 23rd issue of the voice
detailed the delays obstructions and
refusals by members of the executive
mainly director Colby secretary
Kissinger and President Ford to provide
the documents needed by the committee
for its investigation the main
administration tactic was to delay
turning over documents in spite of the
president's public assurances that he
would cooperate in making available all
material in the executive branch
this tactic eventually provoked a number
of subpoenas by the pike committee some
of which at length brought forth the
documents yet the administration knowing
that the committee had a short lifetime
and was working against an approaching
deadline stalled on issue after issue in
order to conceal a maximum amount of
material over the investigative period
thus the committee which wasted the
February through July period in internal
disputes really only had about five
months
from August to December 1975 to do its
investigation and get a report written
and submitted to the House by its
January 31st 1976 deadline
besides delay the executive agencies
also at times rendered important
documents useless by excising
significant content and even by flatly
refusing to turn over documents
requested by the committee finally
fierce battles were fought over the
public release of information obtained
by the committee both over the specific
information and the manner of release
usually the reason given was some
questionable allegation that revelation
would endanger the sources and methods
of the CIA or one of the other agencies
yet another tactic was to prevent
testimony by certain witnesses as in the
case of the State Department officer in
charge of the Cypress desk at the time
of the coup against Macarius this
officer had written a dissenting report
on the handling of intelligence in the
State Department at the time of the
Cyprus crisis but he was prevented by
Kissinger from testifying on what had
happened and why he dissented in another
instance a witness who had revealed
financial improprieties and FBI
purchasing of wiretapping equipment was
afterwards subjected to a 6-hour
interview by two FBI agents who
convinced him to sign a statement
recanting in significant details of his
testimony the witness later repudiated
that statement claiming intimidation by
the two FBI agents with all the
administration's delays refusal of
documents interference with testimony
and deletions of content there can be no
doubt that President Ford secretary
Kissinger and director Colby to name
only the major administration figures
were determined to prevent the pike
committee for making a thorough and
effective investigation in this respect
the charge can validly be made that the
administration tried a cover-up
operation with the pike committee and to
a certain degree probably succeeded yet
the content of part 2 of the committee's
report is most extraordinary and
feeling the major sections deal with
costs failures to anticipate important
events and an analysis of covert action
operations between 1965 and 1975 we find
that the total US intelligence budget
exceeds 10 billion dollars the Congress
however which appropriates the money has
been told consistently that intelligence
costs much less because intelligence
activities have been placed in non
intelligence categories in the budget
exercises on analysis the foreign
intelligence budget was found to total
between three and four times more than
Congress was told
while the domestic budget was more than
five times the reported amount the
committee found accountability for
secret funds lacking and the consequent
spending abuses considerable one CIA
station for example spent 41 thousand
dollars on whiskey and other alcoholic
beverages during 1971 after which the
station chief was placed in charge of
agency operations in Angola failure to
anticipate major events in recent years
reflects in the Select Committee's view
serious shortcomings of the entire US
intelligence apparatus the Tet Offensive
of 1968
for example wasn't foreseen partly at
least because of the American prejudiced
degraded view of the Vietcong because
the technical monitoring system lost
track of the Russian army in Poland
during the first two weeks in August
1968 American intelligence failed to
detect the first Warsaw Pact invasion
move against Czechoslovakia President
Johnson's first news of the invasion
came from Soviet ambassador Dobrynin in
Washington similarly the Egyptian and
Syrian attacks that launched the Yom
Kippur in 1973 caught the intelligence
community by surprise as did the coup
and Portugal in April 1974 the Indian
nuclear explosion in May 1974 and the
coup against the Makarios government in
Cyprus in July in 1974 the Select
Committee's review of CIA covert
action operations is perhaps the most
interesting section of the report
unfortunately the committee's attention
was limited to the covert action
projects approved by the 40 committee
during the 1965 to 1975 period as only
the most sensitive and costly projects
required approval by 40 committee
composed of the assistant to the
president for national security affairs
the deputy secretary of defense the
Undersecretary of State for political
affairs the chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff and the director of Central
Intelligence the select committees
investigation missed the vast majority
of these kinds of operations which would
have been approved internally in the CIA
nevertheless the revelations on covert
action in the report are quite
significant we find for example that
interference in the revered free
electoral processes of other countries
was the largest covert action category
comprising 32 percent of the 40
Committee approvals 29 percent of
approvals or for media and propaganda
operations in which American government
sponsorship was to be hidden 23 percent
of approvals were for paramilitary
operations involving secret support to
foreign armies and irregular military
groups in the form of finance training
and weapons supplies still other CIA
covert action operations involved CIA
finding of a plethora of civic religious
professional and trade union
organizations in depth analysis appear
in the Select Committee's report of
three major covert action projects each
of great interest intervention in
Italian elections since 1948 cost the
CIA 75 million dollars including 10
million dollars spent in 1972 alone most
of this money went to the Christian
Democrats although ambassador Graham
Martin obtained over the CIA's objection
a donation of $800,000 in 1972 four
political forces of the Italian
neo-fascist movement the Ambassador
insisted on the donation and
order to quote demonstrate solidarity
for the long pole end quote underlining
the CIA's intervention in Italy was the
revelation in early 1976 from government
sources other than the Select Committee
that President Ford had approved in
December 1975 in the Italian electoral
process during the months preceding the
next Italian elections at the time of
approval it was not known that elections
will be held as soon as June 1976
paramilitary support by the CIA to the
Kurdish rebellion against the Iraqi
government from 1972 to 1975 which cost
some 16 million dollars was initiated at
the request of the Shah of Iran then
engaged in a border dispute with Iraq
once the Iraqis agreed to a settlement
favorable to Iran the Shah had the
support to the Kurds cut off the
rebellion collapsed over 200,000 Kurds
became refugees and neither Iran nor the
u.s. set up adequate refugee assistance
as one high-ranking but unidentified
witness told the Select Committee quote
covert action should not be confused
with missionary work end quote
the third major covert action operation
examined by the pike committee was the
CIA's intervention in Angola in support
of the Holden Roberto and Jonas Savimbi
forces here we find the conclusion that
the massive Soviet and Cuban was in
large part a reaction to the CIA's poor
intervention that threatened to upset
the three-way stalemate existing before
the CIA got going as a final observation
on covert action operations and one that
is perhaps the most important of all the
pike committee destroyed the doctrine of
plausible denial whereby a President or
Secretary of State could plead ignorance
if operations went awry in public
testimony secretary Kissinger admitted
that every CIA operation of consequence
was approved by the president under the
Ford as well as previous administrations
and in its report the committee
concludes quote all evidence in hand
suggests that the CIA far from being out
of control had been utterly responsive
to the instructions of the president and
the assistant to the president for
national security affairs end quote
for all the valuable information
contained in the pike committee's report
one most important area of CIA
operations was completely overlooked
possibly because the committee
considered the matter too hot to handle
these are the relations between the CIA
and foreign intelligence and security
services commonly known in the agency as
liaison operations through these
operations the CIA trains finances and
in varying degrees guides the foreign
services into operations that will help
the CIA over the years the CIA has
played a major role in the growth and
strengthening of many of the world's
most dreaded and cruel security services
the South Korean CIA the Indonesian kop
kam Ti be the new security services in
South Vietnam the SAVAK in Iran the Oba
n Co di dop S & S ni in Brazil the di na
in Chile and the Federal Police in
Argentina these services and others
helped by the CIA happen to be the most
notorious practitioners of
institutionalized torture and murder in
the free world today they also happen to
be the main sustaining force for the
gross social and economic and justices
prevailing in their countries
nowhere in the pike report can one find
an indication that the Select Committee
even considered the CIA's role in
promoting and supporting such repressive
security services on the contrary the
committee laments the termination of the
aid public safety programs of assistance
to foreign police services a legitimate
foreign aid program because of the CIA's
involvement in it and bad publicity such
as the film stage of siege
if the committee had wanted to get the
truth it could have discovered that the
public safety programs were an extension
of operations already initiated by the
CIA to establish better internal
security in foreign countries and that
the CIA has continued police assistance
work even though the public safety
programs were abolished
if the Select Committee had investigated
the CIA's liaison operations they would
also have discovered that these
operations while considered within the
CIA to be primarily counterintelligence
in nature produced results quite similar
to most covert action operations ie they
strengthened certain political forces
and weaken others just as propaganda
labor and election operations do only
congressman Ronald dellums and arguing
for abolition of all covert action
operations in the recommendations
section of the report is willing to face
the political issue where have covert
operations taken us are the nations that
we have been involved with free
democratic societies where the masses of
people have benefits of democracy or are
those nations for the most part military
dictators right-wing junta's or regimes
with extraordinary wealth and power in
the hands of a few elitists if the
latter holds it totally contradicts
stated principles of this country if we
have been involved in covert actions
which generated democracy freedom and
justice around the world maybe we might
arrive at some different conclusion but
I don't think anyone can justify
continued covert action on grounds that
we foster and develop democracy around
the world
end quote part three of the pike report
outlines the Select Committee's 32
recommendations together with additional
recommendations of individual committee
members this section was not meant to be
kept secret and was not published by The
Village Voice with parts 1 & 2 at its
last session on February 10th the
committee approved the recommendations
which were then filed with the clerk of
the house for a possible future action
and they were simultaneously released to
the press in fact there was little
likelihood that the house would take
early action on the proposals partly
because of the emerging US electoral
campaigns but mainly because of the
general backlash against intelligence
community reformers following the Welch
death and the spate of leaked secrets
including parts one and two of the pike
report most of the recommendations
relate to increasing congressional
control over the intelligence community
especially the CIA and to improving the
quality of management and of the
intelligence product the report
recommends a permanent house
intelligence Oversight Committee along
with closer review of intelligence
spending while the committee would
require that the CIA advised the house
intelligence Oversight Committee within
48 hours of the approval of any covert
action operation the main restriction
recommended is to limit each operation
to 12 months assassinations and
paramilitary operations would be
prohibited except in time of war and the
general approval mechanism for covert
action operations would be
institutionalized and upgraded finally
the pike committee recommended that the
Director of Central Intelligence become
a real manager of the whole intelligence
community and that an Inspector General
for the community be established to
watch out for abuses many will conclude
that the pike committee failed because
its recommendations were so limited and
in any case would serve to strengthen
the CIA and the other agencies to
evaluate the committee's work one must
examine it along with the other
investigative bodies the Senate
investigating committee under Frank
Church and the Rockefeller Commission
both of these groups and President Ford
as well in his reforms of February 18
1976 concentrated quite naturally on the
same areas as the pike committee
increasing congressional oversight
improving the quality of intelligence
and the management of intelligence
agencies and their budgets and
preventing future of
uses to expect more like the completed
abolition of covert action operations or
prohibiting CIA support to foreign
services that torture and murder was
unrealistic after all the CIA and the
other services exist to protect both the
government of which the investigators
are a part and the private interests
protected by the government yet for all
the limitations of the reform exercise
the work of the pike committee and the
other bodies is an exceedingly positive
chapter in American history who would
have dreamed two years ago that such a
great volume of information on secret
American intervention in foreign
countries would ever be made public who
would have dreamed that the vast illegal
domestic operations of the CIA FBI and
NSA would be revealed in great detail
every bit of this information together
with the general methodology that
emerges can be used by people and
organizations to protect themselves now
and when the next wave of the same
occurs no doubt wide areas of CIA
operations were omitted almost entirely
such as those in the trade union field
but no one can say the world's knowledge
of secret intervention hasn't improved
thanks to these investigations of equal
importance is the continuing strength of
the best popular traditions in the
United States that the investigations
demonstrate the free flow of information
resistance to government bureaucracy
resistance to government secrecy and
cover-ups through the effective
functioning of these traditions
Americans have been able to learn how
necessary corruption and hypocrisy are
to the way the current system operates
abolition of covert action operations
which corrupt the countries expressed
principles cannot come until fundamental
changes are made in other institutions
meanwhile the treasure of knowledge
gained through the investigations must
surely contribute to the understanding
that government in a liberal society
must of necessity function in favor of
one class and to the detriment of an
other in July 1976 the chief
investigator of the House Committee on
standards of official conduct who have
been trying since March to discover how
the copies of parts 1 and 2 of the pike
report were leaked to Daniel Schorr
reported that nearly 50 copies of the
report were in different executive and
congressional offices when the leak
occurred
none of the 207 government officials
questioned including secretary Kissinger
and the members of the pike committee
would admit to being the culprit thanks
to one of them at least the Bertrand
Russell peace foundation is able to
present for the first time in book form
parts 1 2 & 3 of the pike report a
document of truly historic significance
not only for Americans but also for
people's the world over who has suffered
from clandestine American intervention
Cambridge England August 1976
this is our hidden history
you